Bit Manipulation (#1851)
girlscript/winter-of-contributing: Competitive_Programming/C++/Bit Manipulation/bit_manipulation.md

> # Bit Manipulation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Bitwise Operators
```

## Use of Bit Operators

> Bit operators perform operations much faster than arthmetic or logical operators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bitwise operators perform operations much faster than arithmetic or logical operators.
```

> ## Types of Bit Operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Types of Bitwise Operator
```

> There are mainly 6 types of bit operators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are mainly 6 types of bitwise operators
```

1. `AND`
2. `OR`
3. `XOR`
4. `Left shift operator`
5. `Right shift operator`
6. `Bitwise NOT`

   <br/><br>

   ![Symbols representing Bitwise operator](https://miro.medium.com/max/540/1*lwKj-TpvToBxuq98LXII1A.png)

<br/><br>

## **_Bitwise AND_**

The bitwise AND operator takes two arguments and performs AND operation on the operands bit by bit.

> The operation will only be 1 when both operands are 1 otherwise it remains 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The operation will be 1 only when both the bits are 1 otherwise it remains 0.
```

![Table](https://i1.wp.com/techvidvan.com/tutorials/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2019/12/implementation-of-and-operation-on-binary-digits.jpg?resize=341%2C272&ssl=1)

<br />

## **_Bitwise OR_**

> The bitwise OR operator takes two arguments and performs OR operation on each bit of the value of the operand. In the OR operation in binary, the resultant is 0 when both operands are 0 otherwise it is 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bitwise OR operator takes two arguments and performs OR operations on each bit of the operands. In the OR operation, the resultant is 0 when i-th bit of both the operands is 0 otherwise the result is 1.
```

![](https://i2.wp.com/techvidvan.com/tutorials/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2019/12/bitwise-or-operations.jpg?resize=325%2C238&ssl=1)

<br />

## **_Bitwise XOR_**

> The bitwise Xor takes two operands and performs Xor operation on the binary digits. The Xor operation gives 0 as a result when both operands are the same and 1 when operands are different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bitwise XOR takes two operands and performs XOR operation on the binary digits. The Xor operation gives 0 as a result when i-th bit of both the operands is same and 1 when the bits are different.
```

![](https://i2.wp.com/techvidvan.com/tutorials/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2019/12/example-of-bitwise-Xor-operation.jpg?resize=500%2C197&ssl=1)

<br/>

## **_Left Shift Operator_**

The left shift operator shifts the bits of the numbers by a specified number of places.

`Example 1`:

Let’s see how this works.

**2<<2 = 8**

> 2 is represented as ‘010’

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2 is represented as ‘010’ in binary form.
```

> We shift the digits to _left up_ to two places. So, it will be ‘1000’ in binary and 8 in decimal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We shift the digits to _left up_ to two places. So, it will become ‘1000’ in binary and 8 in decimal.
```

`Example 2`:

**3<<4 = 48**

10 in binary is ‘1010’

Shifting 4 digits to the _left_ will make it ‘011 0000’ which is 48 in decimal.

Shortcut for \*\*left shit operator

<br />

## **_Right Shift Operator_**

> This is similar to the left shift, but instead of shifting digits to the left we are shifting them to the right. In this process, some of the bits are lost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is similar to the left shift, but instead of shifting digits to the left, we shift them to the right. In this process, some of the bits get discarded.
```

`Example 1`:

**4>>2 = 1**

Let’s see how this works.

So, 4 in binary is “100”.

By shifting “100” to 2 places to the _right_ we will lose our 2 rightmost digits and we will only be left with “001”.

In decimal, “001” represents 1 and that’s our answer.

`Example 2`:

**20>>2 = 5**

20 in binary is “10100”. We _right shift_ them up to 2 places so, we are now left with “101” which is 5.

<br/>

## **_Bitwise NOT_**

> This operator requires single input and does its negation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This operator requires single input and inverts all the bits of the given input.
```

> If the input value is one it gets converted to zero

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the i-th bit is 1 it gets converted to 0 and vice-versa.
```
